[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So we're sort of in the
last part of the class now.
And I've been reflecting
on what to do together.
And I asked everybody for
some input, a little survey
about what topics to do
and how much detail to do.
And there was no
consensus in the survey
of what people wanted to do.
But I decided I would like
to do, for a couple of weeks,
talk about some applications of
projection theory in other areas
and then, the last
couple of weeks,
try to talk about at least some
of the main ideas in the proof
of the projection theorem.
Yeah.
- So we recently had been doing
Bourgain's projection theorem
and the Bourgain-Katz-Tao
projection theorem in finite
fields--
and so feeling
that we really had
to work pretty hard
for those things.
And it was striking that
we had to work pretty hard
just to get this very
small improvement.
And so in some of what we'll
do in the rest of the class,
I will try to show that
that small improvement is
really valuable.
OK.
So yeah.
So the plan for the rest of the
class is, for about one week,
we'll talk about
random walks on groups.
And then for about
one week, we'll
talk about homogeneous dynamics.
And then at the end, we'll
talk about the sharp projection
theorem.
OK.
Cool.
And also, in the
last few classes,
I felt that we were doing
some very technical things
and sometimes a little
bit of a struggle.
So for today, what I
want to do is to give,
I hope, a very friendly
introduction to random
walks on groups
and then next week,
on Tuesday, to explain how
projection theory helps
to figure out some
interesting things.
OK.
So I'll talk about.
random walks on groups.
All right.
So suppose that G
is a finite group.
And then mu is a
probability measure on G.
So I'll think of it as
a function on G which
is non-negative and sums to 1.
OK.
So if you have a probability
measure like this,
you can do a random walk where,
at each step of the random walk,
you pick an element of
G by this probability,
and then you move
by that element.
So here's how the
random walk works.
So you start
somewhere, say at g0.
Then you sample
a step h from mu.
And the next guy,
g1, is g0 times h.
So that's one step
of the random walk.
And then you can
keep doing this.
OK.
And so if you do take k
steps of the random walk,
then there will be some
probability distribution
of where you end
up after k steps.
And one main question
about random walks
is, how evenly distributed is
that probability distribution?
So question-- how
evenly distributed
is the random walk
after k steps?
And we'll make this more
precise in a moment.
All right.
So it is helpful to describe
this random walk using
convolution.
OK.
So convolution on a
group looks like this.
We have two functions,
f1 and f2, on this group.
And then if I convolve
them with each other
and I evaluate that
at g, that's the sum
g1 times g2 equals g f of
g1, f1 of g1, f2 of g2.
That's the sum over
all the g1 and g2
that multiply to g of this.
OK.
And then for mu, we
can make an operator.
And T mu of f is just
f convolved with mu.
And this operator basically
describes this random walk.
So let's say how
they're related.
So suppose I were to
take T mu and apply it
to the delta function at g0
and evaluate that at some g.
OK.
So let's see.
What's a good way to write this?
So that's the sum
of-- actually, let
me look at how I
wrote it in my notes.
I tried writing this
a few ways, and then I
decided there was a
good way to write it.
Yeah.
Let's write it this way.
So suppose I want to
evaluate this at g0 times h.
So that's the sum
over g1 times g2
equals g0 times h
of delta function
at g0 of g1 times mu of g2.
All right.
So the only way that this sum
can be not 0 is if g1 is g0.
So there's only one
term in this sum.
That's this g0 times g2
is g0 times h of mu of g2.
There's only one term, and
it's the term where g2 is h.
OK.
So this thing is the
probability distribution
of one step of the random walk.
The probability if I started at
g0 that I end up at g0 times h
is mu of h.
That's the definition
of my random walk.
So this operator is performing
one step of the random walk.
And therefore, if I take
T mu to the k of delta g0,
that's like k steps of the
random walk, starting at g0.
OK.
Actually, let me say this--
I could say this better.
So this is the probability
that our random walk
is at g after k steps.
OK.
Now we can take this question,
how evenly distributed
is the random walk?
We can write that as a
precise question about this.
I'll call it question 1.
So I'd like to estimate T
mu to the k of delta g0.
So this is the actual
probability distribution.
And if the probability
was completely even
over the whole group, it would
be 1 over the size of the group
everywhere.
So I'm going to see how close
it is to that by measuring
the norm of this difference.
So I'd like to estimate that.
OK.
And L2 is helpful but also
perhaps a little arbitrary.
You could also put other
norms, so could put
or L infinity or
maybe some other norm.
OK.
So this is the kind of question
about random walks on groups
that we are going to
try to understand.
All right.
So to understand this,
it is helpful to notice
that this is a linear operator.
This T mu is a linear operator.
It's basically a matrix.
And it's helpful to think about
that in terms of matrix ideas,
like the singular values and
singular vectors of this matrix.
So T mu is a linear operator.
And we're going to study the
singular values and singular
vectors of T. OK.
So there is one simple singular
value or eigenvalue, I guess,
that T mu of 1 is 1.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Are singular values
and single vectors just the same
as eigenvalues and
eigenvectors [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: They
are closely related.
So let me do a quick review of
singular values and eigenvalues.
Right.
If you have a
matrix and you think
about what it does
to the unit ball,
it will turn the unit
ball into an ellipsoid.
And the principal
axes of this ellipsoid
are the singular values,
sigma 1, sigma 2.
OK.
So if we look at the
preimages of these things,
those will be the
singular vectors--
well, depending on
the matrix, they
could be pointing any which way.
But maybe that's
v2 and that is v1.
OK.
And they will always be--
so we'll have-- so the Vi, or
orthonormal, and the size of MVi
is sigma i.
And the MVi are also
orthonormal also orthogonal.
Those are the singular vectors.
OK.
Now, they are not
generally eigenvectors,
in the sense that MVi will not
usually be a multiple of Vi.
But they are closely
related to them.
The Vi are the eigenvectors of
M M star-- or M star M, I guess.
And the sigma i squared are
the eigenvalues of M star M
equal to lamda i M M star.
So in particular, this
biggest singular vector
measures the operator norm
of the matrix, which is the--
so these are ordered like this.
And Mv is at most sigma 1 v.
OK.
So the reason we're talking
about singular values
is, we're going to care
about stuff like this.
And this is naturally
associated with singular values
if M is not symmetric.
It's not necessarily the same
as talking about eigenvalues.
OK.
So if we take this
T mu of the function
1, the constant function,
we will just get 1.
Because this T mu is like
an averaging operator.
We're averaging T--
so T mu of f at g
is the average value of g at
some other places around g
that are dictated by mu.
So T mu of 1 is 1.
So that implies that the--
OK.
So I'll do a little lemma.
The largest singular value--
yeah, OK.
So little lemma is that.
T mu of f in L2 is
at most f in L2.
And this is sharp
because of this example.
It could be equal.
OK.
So proving this will help
us think a little bit
about what convolution means.
So T mu of f is f
convolved with mu--
g here.
So that's the sum g1 g2
equals g f of g1 mu of g2.
And I'd like to think of
this as a sum over g2.
So it's the sum over g2.
Because I'm thinking of it that
way, I can bring the mu of g2
out front.
And then what I have
left is f of g1,
which is g times g2 inverse.
And I want to think of this as
a linear combination of a bunch
of different functions of g.
OK.
Let's give them a name.
So this function
of g is sort of f.
But we first did this thing.
And I want you to
think of it as taking f
and then shifting
it using the group.
So it's the right
translation by g2 of f of g
is defined to be
this thing here.
So we could plug that in.
And this shifting operation
doesn't change the norm of g.
So Rg2 of f in L2 is
the same as f in L2.
Ah, I've been mentioning L2.
Yeah, I should say--
OK.
Let me pause for a second.
I should have said
something before.
So when we have
these functions on g,
we're going to
measure their norm.
And if I have f L2 of g, this
is going to be sum g of g?
F of g squared to the 1/2.
Or I could take inner product.
The inner product of f1
and f2 is the sum g of G f1
of g, f2 of g to that.
So the functions on
G are a Hilbert space
with this natural measure.
OK.
So then if I take a function
and I translate it or do
this right translation,
that just permutes the value
so it doesn't change this thing.
OK.
So now if we look at our
T mu of f, I have this--
yeah.
So actually, if I'm interested
in the norm of T mu of f,
this is the norm of the sum
on g2 mu of g2 R sub g2 of f.
It's a linear combination
of these functions,
which are all translates of f.
And L2 is a norm.
It obeys the
triangle inequality.
So this is less than the sum on
g2, mu of g2, Rg2 of f in L2.
All of these have the same
norm, which is the L2 norm of f
And then this adds up to 1.
So this is just
the L2 norm of f.
OK.
So this is a basic fact
about averaging operators.
And to understand whether the
random walk is mixing things up,
we have to care about how it
behaves on the space orthogonal
to 1.
And the first observation is
that it preserves the space
orthogonal to 1.
So let's give that space
a name, say L2 of G 0
is the set of f and L2 of g so
that some g in G of f of g is 0.
This is saying that
f is orthogonal
to the constant function.
OK.
So another simple lemma is
that our operator T mu actually
takes this space to itself.
So it takes the constant
function to itself,
and it takes the
perpendicular space
to itself, which will imply
that the constant function is
one of the singular
vectors of this operator.
OK, so proof-- so I want to
understand the sum g in G T
mu f of g.
I'm going to imagine that
the sum of f of g is 0,
and I want to see if
that's still true.
All right.
So that's the sum g
in G. Sum g1 times g2
equals g, f of g1 mu of g2.
And if you think about
what we're summing over,
we're just summing
over g1 and g2.
So this is the sum over g1
and g2, of f of g1, mu of G2.
And now that factors.
So this is 1.
And if f was in L2 of
G 0, this would be 0.
This is 0.
So if f is in L2 of G 0, then
so T mu of f will be also.
OK, cool.
All right.
So we've seen that
T mu of 1 is 1.
And T mu takes L2
of G 0 to itself.
So this is the largest
singular value.
So we've seen it.
And then here, there's
something else.
So let's say sigma 1 of mu--
so this is 1.
I'll call it sigma 0 of T mu.
Somehow, in this setting,
the 1 is trivial.
And everything else will
depend on the trace of mu.
So sigma 1 of T mu is the
largest singular value
of this part.
OK.
All right.
So question 2 is going to
be to estimate sigma 1 of t.
And these two questions
are related to each other.
This thing helps
to understand how--
it helps a lot to understand
how this operator behaves
and to answer question 1.
So let me put up a simple
proposition, how question 2 is
related to question 1.
So proposition-- if you look at
that thing, T mu to the k delta
function of g0 minus
1 over G in L2,
this is bounded by sigma
1 of T mu to the k.
OK, so proof-- so we want
to see what T mu to the k
does to a delta
function at a point.
Let's take this delta
And T mu splits up.
The constant function is
an eigenfunction and then
the things with mean 0.
So let's split up
this delta function.
So the constant part
of it is like this.
And then we have this.
So the reason we
split it up that way
is that this part, which in
the beginning of the class,
we would have called
the high part of this--
so I guess I'll do that.
That's in L2 of G 0.
The 0 part.
OK.
Now what happens when
we apply this operator?
Well, this operator takes
constants to constants.
It's the identity on
the constant part.
And so if I take T
mu to the k delta g0,
this part will stay
1 over G inside.
I'll take the left-hand side.
And then if I subtract
that, it will disappear.
So what I'll be
left with is T mu
to the k on this high
part of the delta g0.
OK.
How big is that?
Well, this part
lives in this space.
So we can bound the size of this
thing using the singular vector.
So we get T mu to the
k of delta g0 high to--
that's bounded by sigma 1 of T
mu to k times delta g0 high L2.
OK.
And now it's also now
straightforward to check
that this is smaller than 1.
OK.
So it's an application.
If we were able to arrange
that sigma 1 of T mu to the k
was less than 1 over 100
times the size of G, then,
well, this L2 norm would be less
than 1 over 100 times the size
of G.
And so in particular,
the L infinity norm
would be less than 1 over
100 times the size of G.
So then I would say
that for every G,
T mu k delta g0 of g
minus 1 over the size of g
would be smaller than 1 over
100 times the size of g.
That would tell us,
say, that this function
is pretty close to this
constant function, within 1%.
So that random walk would now
have mixed pretty thoroughly.
OK, great.
So if we can get our
hands on sigma 1 of T mu,
then we can figure out how
long it takes this random walk
to mix evenly.
Cool.
OK.
So now let me tell you
an interesting example
of a particular group
and a particular mu
where there's a cool
estimate for this.
So we are going
to mostly focus--
or maybe only focus--
on the group SL2 of Fp--
and could pick many different
measures for a random walk.
But one nice one
which has been studied
is to take the set A to
be-- so, first of all,
if A is a subset of g,
there's a natural measure
on A, which is the uniform
measure, so measure on A,
which is 1 over the
cardinality of A times
the sum a in A of delta A.
OK.
So there's a nice set,
A, inside of here,
which was studied by
Selberg, A. Selberg.
Well, OK, which is relevant
to a theorem of Selberg.
He set his theorem differently.
OK.
So there are four
elements in this set.
And these are our generators
of the group SL2 Fp.
There are many ways
you could choose
generators for this group,
but this is probably
the simplest way.
OK.
And now I can state a theorem.
So theorem 1 exists
a positive c--
I think 1 over 100
should be fine--
so that for every
p prime, if you
take A Selberg and SL2 of Fp.
You make a random walk.
So in this setting, let me
write TA for T sub mu sub A.
Then sigma 1 of
TA is less than 1
minus c, so uniformly
for all primes.
So this is, say, 99/100.
Then you can just read
off high powers of this
or bounded by something.
And you can plug that into
the discussion over here.
So it says that that random
walk mixes extremely fast.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: How does
sigma 1 behave
as you iterate over the primes?
Does it converge to sub 1
minus c or oscillate a lot ?
LAWRENCE GUTH: So the question
is, how does sigma 1 of to
behave as the prime varies?
I do not know the
answer to that question.
So let me say that this is
a corollary of a theorem
of Selberg from the late '50s.
And Selberg's actual theorem
is about the first eigenvalue
of the Laplacian on a
hyperbolic surface, which
is associated to this group.
And you can go back and forth.
With modern technology,
it's considered not very
difficult to go back and
forth between a bound
for the eigenvalue of the
surface and a bound here.
But when you do
go back and forth,
you will screw up the constants.
Selberg's theorem was that the
first eigenvalue of that surface
was at least 3/16.
And that's probably
not the right answer.
And he conjectured that
it should be a quarter.
So for his actual problem,
there is a beautiful conjecture
about what happens as
p goes to infinity,
which is that the eigenvalues
should converge to a quarter.
For this, I'm not sure.
OK, cool.
Cool.
OK.
So bounds like this are
also related to expander
graphs, isoperimetric
inequalities in graphs.
And I thought I
would also show that.
And so it shows that--
well, OK, so let
me explain that.
So if you have a set of
generators inside of a group,
we can use that to make a
graph called a Cayley graph.
And this mixing inequality
can be thought of
or implies some interesting
geometric features of the graph.
So expansion in graphs--
OK.
So if G is a finite group And
A is a set of generators--
and i guess that
to have a graph,
maybe we should say that is a
symmetric set of generators.
I don't know if
that's important.
Yeah, let's do it.
Then we'll have a Cayley
graph, Cayley graph of G, A--
so is a graph.
The vertices are g in
G. And a pair, g1, g2,
is an edge if and only if g2
is g1 times a or vice versa.
Yeah, so I guess we
should have it symmetric.
g2 equals g1 times a,
where a is in A. OK.
And the random walk
we've been imagining
is basically the random
walk on this graph.
You start at a vertex,
and you move randomly
to a neighboring
along the edges.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: How do you identify
SL2 of a finite field
with a hyperbolic surface?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, I will--
OK.
We'll talk about the connection
to hyperbolic geometry
a little later when we talk
about the proof of this theorem.
Let's do it then.
Yeah.
OK.
So that's the Cayley graph.
And in this graph, if
I have subsets S and T
inside of the vertices, E of S
and T, the edges from S to T,
that's going to be the set of
g1, g2 in S cross T so that g1,
g2 is an edge--
so the set of edges from S to T.
OK.
So proposition-- if we
have C G, A, as above,
then the number of
edges from S to S
complement-- so S is going to
be a subset of the vertices.
The number of these
edges is at least 1
minus sigma 1 of t A times
A times S times S complement
over G.
OK.
So let's digest
this a little bit.
So what does this
expression mean?
Well, this is how many
points there are in the set,
S. From each of those points,
there are A edges coming out.
So this is how many
edges there are
that are leaving points of
S. How many of them do we
think end up in S complement?
Well, we don't really know.
But as a reference point,
if everything was random,
the fraction of edges that
ended up in S complement
might be S complement over G.
So this expression here
would be the typical number
of edges from S to
S complement if we
had a random graph where each
vertex was in this many edges.
OK.
And then we're going to say
that the actual number of edges
is at least some
fraction of that.
If sigma 1 of TA were 1, this
would be a trivial inequality,
which is bigger than 0.
But if sigma 1 is
smaller than 1,
then this is a
nontrivial inequality.
And it says that
the number of edges
is a definite
fraction of what you
would see in the random model.
OK.
So let's prove this or at
least give a proof sketch.
So the key point is that we can
describe this quantity using
this operator TA.
And then it becomes
not so surprising
that the singular value
of TA is relevant.
How do you do it?
The number of edges from S to S
complement is the inner product,
is the inner product of TA of
the characteristic function
of S with the characteristic
function of S complement.
And there's a factor
of A in front.
This is a normalization
if TA had been just--
TA is an averaging operator.
But we didn't really
want to average,
we wanted to count edges.
So there's an extra factor.
OK.
Does this look
plausible to people?
Should we write this?
Let's write this
out a little bit.
So TA 1S of g is 1 over A sum
of a in A of 1S of g a inverse.
So that's the definition
of the convolution.
So then when we take
this inner product,
we're going to have the sum g in
G 1 over A sum a in A 1S of ga
inverse 1S complement of g.
So we'll be counting g's
that are in S complement
but g a inverses in S. And
that's an edge that starts in S
and goes to S complement.
So S, S complement.
Over here, we have g.
Over here, we have g a inverse.
And those are
connected by an edge.
That's the thing
that we're counting.
OK.
This double sum here means
going through all the edges.
But we're only
counting an edge if it
goes from S to S complement.
And we have this, which
we didn't really want,
which is why we multiply
by this over here.
OK.
Great.
So now remember that this
operator sort of splits.
It takes the constant function
to the constant functions,
and it takes the mean 0
functions to the mean 0
functions.
So we should split
everybody in sight
into a constant part
and a mean 0 part.
So we split.
1S is S over G-- that's
the constant part--
plus 1S minus S over G. So
this-- so I'll call it 1S high.
And it lives in L2 of G0.
OK.
Do the same thing
for S complement.
So now the number of edges
from S to S complement,
that is A times--
OK.
We'll have TA of
the constant parts.
So that's S, G, S complement G
plus A times the high-frequency
parts, the mean 0 parts TA of
1S high 1S complement high.
OK.
So let's call this 0.
And this is the high part.
Or let's call this the constant
part, and this is the high part.
So the rest of it is
just a computation.
And I won't do the
algebra carefully.
But if you do the
constant part, you
get this A S S complement over
G. The constant part exactly
tracks what would happen if
all the edges were random.
And then for the high part--
of course, we won't
compute it exactly
because we have to know
what the operator TA is.
But we can bound it by the
norm of TA, the sigma 1 of TA,
times 1S high in L2 times
1S complement high in L2.
OK.
And then those things are
straightforward to compute,
those L2 norms.
And if you compute them,
you get that this is A--
I'll put the sigma 1 out front.
And then it's the same thing--
A S S complement over G. OK.
So the true answer
is the constant term
plus the high term, which
is like an error term,
and whose size is at most this.
And if sigma 1 is
strictly less than 1,
then the error term is strictly
smaller than the constant term.
So something will be left over.
And that's the inequality.
OK.
So let me make a little remark.
If S is smaller than G
over 2, then S complement
is bigger than G over 2.
So this is more or less
without loss of generality
if you switch the roles
of S and S complement.
But it means S
complement is at least G
over 2, which means that this
whole fraction has order of 1.
So then we get that the number
of edges from S to S complement
is at least 1/2 sigma
1 of TA A times S.
So it's at least a
definite fraction
of all of the possible edges
that it could be leaving us.
OK.
So this property here is
called being an expander graph.
Because if you take a set that's
less than half of the graph
and then you add to it all of
the edges that are leaving it,
then it will get
significantly bigger.
It will expand.
So it's called an
expander graph.
OK.
Cool.
So this proposition shows that
if this sigma 1 is strictly less
than 1-- it's something
like in Selberg's theorem--
then the edges in the
graph behave in this way,
that it's an expander graph.
OK, cool.
OK.
So Selberg did not state
his theorem in this way.
So this is slightly ahistorical.
But Selberg's
theorem plus things
that are not very
difficult in hindsight
show that this Cayley graph of
SL2 Fp is an expander graph.
And it is in a sense the first--
Selberg didn't quite say
this, but in a sense,
this was the first proof that
any graph was an expander graph.
Expander graphs were officially
defined in 1970 by Pinsker
and something pretty close
by Kolmogorov and Barzdin
in the '60s.
And all of those people
realized that random graphs
were expander graphs.
Yeah.
So maybe many people have
seen, but it's really
a remarkable thing.
So just for comparison,
like a simple graph that we
might think of that we
can easily visualize
would be an n-by-n grid.
And that kind of graph is
not an expander at all.
So an n-by-n grid has
n squared vertices.
But you can cut it in
half with a vertical line,
and you only cut n edges.
So the number of edges--
so S and S complement are
each about half of the graph.
The number of edges between
them is much smaller than S.
So these are very large graphs.
But the number of edges
it takes to cut it in half
is comparable to
all of the edges.
And most graphs are like that.
But before people
realized it, it
was surprising and
counterintuitive
that any graphs were like that.
And it's a very significant
fact in many domains
of math and science.
OK.
Let me pause there.
And questions about
Selberg's theorem
and this setup, mixing
and expansion and--
AUDIENCE: So the point
of A being generators
is just so that it's connected?
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Yes, that's right.
So the question is, what is the
point of A being generators?
So if A did not
generate the group,
then this graph would
be disconnected,
and then it wouldn't mix at all.
So make a remark--
suppose that A is in a
finite group and that H--
so the subgroup
generated by A is
H, which is a proper subgroup.
OK.
So then if we take
TA and we apply it
to the characteristic
function of this subgroup,
since all of these guys
are in the subgroup,
we would just stay
in the subgroup.
So this would be 1H.
OK.
And that implies, with a teeny
bit of work, that sigma 1 of TA
would be 1.
OK.
One thing we could
see is that no matter
how many times we
repeat this operation,
we will never mix
over the whole group
because we'll
never get out of H.
And so based on what we've
seen before, this should be 1.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Does it make A big--
does it just make the graph
more likely to be expander?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question is,
if we make A big,
is the graph more likely
to be an expander?
Perhaps.
So we could take A big,
and then it would--
so we're allowed to take A big.
And we will talk in a little
bit about what we can say.
If we just know that A
is big, what does that
tell us about sigma of TA?
We'll talk about that.
All right.
So another remark
I wanted to make
is that the first proof of this
theorem was very difficult.
So the first proof
depended on-- so it
had some interesting analysis
related to hyperbolic geometry.
But then it depended on
the Riemann hypothesis
for curves over finite fields.
So that's a beautiful
and important theorem.
But if you wanted to include
the whole proof of that,
then the proof of this
theorem is effectively
several hundred pages long and
has a lot of algebraic geometry.
And in around the early 1990s,
Sarnak and Xue gave a much
simpler proof, which is the
proof that we'll talk about.
OK.
So in the rest of
the class, I will
start to describe the
proof by Sarnak and Xue
and introduce the
first key idea.
All right.
OK.
So the first idea, this idea has
to do with the representation
theory of the group SL2 Fp.
So proposition-- OK.
So if we have a representation--
so a representation is a group
homomorphism to-- it's a
unitary representation--
so to the unitary
group in d dimensions.
So this is a representation,
meaning a group homomorphism.
OK.
And so there's the trivial
representation, where everything
goes to the identity.
But let me say it is a
nontrivial representation.
Then actually, d
needs to be quite big.
d is at least p plus 1 over 2.
OK.
So before we prove
this theorem, let's
try to put it in context
by trying to think
about group representations.
Where would we find a
group representation?
OK.
Well, SL2 Fp acts on itself.
So it acts on the space that
we started with L2 of G.
So any group G acts on
L2 of G by the action
that we wrote down.
You take a function, and you
shift the space under it.
OK.
That action is not trivial.
Only the constant
functions are fixed.
So that's a nontrivial action.
And the dimension of this
space is the cardinality of G.
So for this group, that
would be about p cubed.
So cardinality of
SL2 Fp sub f p cubed.
OK.
What else?
Well, if you have
a subgroup of G--
H is a subgroup of G--
then G acts on G mod H. And
so it acts on this as a set.
And so it acts on L2 of G mod
H by a unitary representation.
And so the dimension
of L2 of G mod H
is the cardinality
of G mod H, which
is the cardinality of G divided
by the cardinality of H. OK.
So let's think of some
subgroups of SL2 Fp.
I think of-- the diagonal
subgroup looks like this.
And the size of the diagonal
subgroup is around p.
There's the unipotent
subgroup, looks like this.
Size of the unipotent
subgroup is p.
And you could mix
these together.
So there's the upper
triangular subgroup.
But we already
used the letter u.
So I'm going to call
this B for Borel.
So I'll write it a a inverse t.
That's a subgroup.
And the size of the
upper triangular subgroup
is around p squared.
So that's the biggest one that
we have come up with here.
And if you plug this in here--
so if you take SL2 Fp
modulo rho, that's around p.
And so this is the right
order of magnitude.
OK.
And this is an interesting
fact about this group,
which is extremely different
from abelian groups.
So for an abelian group, every
irreducible representation
is one-dimensional.
So there are lots and lots of
representations where d is 1.
But for SL2 Fp.
Life is very different.
All of them have
very large dimension.
OK.
So let's prove this theorem.
So I had heard about
this theorem years ago.
And I always assumed that
to prove this theorem,
one had to study a lot
of representation theory.
And I was a little
intimidated by it.
But then I read the
proof as I was getting
ready to teach this class.
And actually, it
doesn't require anything
that's outside of a good
undergraduate algebra
curriculum.
And it's quite elegant.
All right.
So here's the proof.
So we're going to focus on
this matrix for a little while
and try to figure out what
the representation does
with this matrix.
So let's suppose for now
that rho of this matrix
is not just the identity.
Actually, let me say it
in a different order.
So u is that matrix and
v is this matrix, which
is very similar to u.
And we'll make the remark that--
so exercise-- at this point,
I won't include the details.
u and v generate SL2 of Fp.
OK.
If you play around a little
bit, you can see this.
All right.
So therefore, if we have a
nontrivial representation,
these cannot both
go to the identity.
So rho is nontrivial.
So either rho of u or row
of v is not the identity.
And u and v are so
similar to each other,
it doesn't really
matter which one.
So I'm going to say, essentially
without loss of generality,
rho of u is not i lamda
All right.
Now let's think about rho of u.
There's something quite special
about this matrix, which
is that it is conjugate
to powers of itself.
Let me write that down.
So suppose take a diagonal
matrix, a, a inverse.
And I put this
matrix in the middle.
And then I want to conjugate it.
So now I put on the
other side the inverse.
So this is the conjugate
of my matrix u.
OK.
So I multiply this by this.
I multiply the top row by a and
the bottom row by a inverse.
So I get a a 0 a inverse.
And then I still have this guy.
Now, when I multiply
these matrices together,
I multiply the left column by
a inverse and the right column
by a.
The diagonals cancel.
But I get 1 0 1 a squared.
OK, so see that u is conjugate
tp u to the power a squared.
And this is for
any a in F we saw.
So that is a special
and really interesting
feature of this
element of my group.
And so now I have
a representation.
And rho of u is conjugate to
rho of u of a squared, which
is rho of u to the a squared.
So now I have a matrix.
I have a unitary matrix.
And it is conjugate to
a big power of itself.
OK.
In the world of
matrices, it's not
so easy to get that to happen.
So this group has an
interesting property
that has an element which is
conjugate to many different
powers of itself.
And in matrices, it's
not so easy to find
a matrix which is conjugate to
many different powers of itself.
Why?
Because of how the
eigenvalues behave.
OK.
So now let's think
about eigenvalues.
OK.
So rho of u is in
U of d is a matrix.
And if rho of u is conjugate
to rho of u to the a squared,
then that tells us that the
eigenvalues, the spectrum of rho
of u is the same as the
eigenvalues of rho of u
to the a squared.
Two conjugate matrices
have the same eigenvalues.
But if you take a matrix
and raise it to a power,
the eigenvalues are
all raised to a power.
So this is the eigenvalues
of rho of u to the a squared.
OK.
So for instance, you
could take a to be 2.
And it tells if you have
an eigenvalue of rho of u,
you raise it to the fourth
power, that will also
be an eigenvalue of rho of u.
And you can keep doing that.
And it's not just 4.
We have many choices
for a squared.
OK.
So let's think about what
the eigenvalues of rho of u
may be like--
so eigenvalues of rho of u.
So this is an amazing
fact about them.
And there's a more
pedestrian fact
that we should also observe.
We know that u to the
p is the identity.
And therefore, rho of u
to the p is the identity.
So then if lambda is an
eigenvalue of rho of u,
then we get that
lambda to the p is 1.
OK.
So the eigenvalues of rho of u,
they're all p-th roots of unity.
So we get the following.
If lambda is an eigenvalue of
rho of u, then lambda to the p
is 1 and lambda to
the a squared is also
an eigenvalue of rho of u.
OK.
So since lambda
to the p is 1, we
only care about a squared mod p.
So we could put mod p there.
And there are p minus 1 over
2 quadratic residues mod p.
So this a squared mod p, it
could be any quadratic residue
mod p.
There are p minus
1 over 2 of them.
And if you take a
p-th root of unity
and you raise it to a power
that's between 1 and p,
you'll change it.
So lambda is a primitive.
So if lambda is
not 1, then lambda
is a primitive
p-th root of unity.
And that tells us that the
lambda to the a squared mod p
are all distinct for the p minus
1 over 2 quadratic residues.
OK.
So we now have
seen that there are
an awful lot of different
eigenvalues, which
can only happen if the matrix
is in a large dimension.
So that gives us that d is
at least p plus 1 over 2.
OK.
So how do we know
that rho of you
has an eigenvalue that's not 1?
Well, if all the eigenvalues
were 1, then rho of u
is conjugate to a matrix
with 1's on the diagonals
and some upper triangular stuff.
And if you raise
that to a power,
you'll never get the identity.
There's an exercise.
So there's a little
something more to
exercise-- if the
eigenvalues of rho of u
are exactly the set 1 and
rho of u to the p equals 1,
then rho of u is the identity.
I'll leave the matrix details.
Cool.
OK.
So all the representations
of SL2 are really big.
Why does that matter?
Let's do another proposition.
So proposition 2-- you
take sigma 1 of T mu.
So mu is a probability
measure on SL2 Fp.
Then sigma 1 of this guy, if
you square it and you multiply
by d plus 1 over 2, that is at
most the size of SL2 Fp times mu
L2 squared.
Simplifying the algebra a little
bit, sigma 1 of T mu squared
is smaller than around 1 over
p squared times mu L2 squared.
OK.
All right.
So we come back to the question
from earlier in the class.
How are singular values
related to eigenvalues?
So sigma i of T mu squared is
lambda i of T mu T mu star,
i-th eigenvalue of this matrix.
And the key observation is that
the eigenspaces of this matrix
have a G action on them.
And except for the
constant functions,
the eigenspaces are not trivial.
There's the key.
Eigenspaces of T mu T mu
star have the G action.
And except for the
constant functions--
so the constant functions are an
eigenspace of T mu, T mu star.
But all the other ones,
it's a nontrivial action.
Let's suppose that for a moment
and see why it's helpful.
And then we can think
more carefully about what
exactly are the eigenspaces.
All right.
OK.
So that tells us that each
sigma i has a multiplicity which
is at least d plus 1 over 2.
And we really care about
the biggest singular vector.
There's not just one
biggest singular vector,
but there's a whole singular
subspace of a big dimension.
And all of those vectors have
this large singular value.
OK.
So now another fact
from linear algebra
is that if you add up the
singular values squared
of the matrix with
multiplicity, that
is the Hilbert-Schmidt
norm of the matrix.
So it's the sum of the
entries of the matrix.
So this is a matrix where
the rows and columns
are indexed by our group, g.
So it has an entry, g1, g2.
And it's the sum of
the entries squared.
Does this look familiar to
people from linear algebra?
OK.
Now, the entries of our
matrix, we can read off.
It's the sum g1 g2 mu of
something like g1 g2 inverse.
This might not be exactly
right, but it's the right idea.
That's the entry.
And then we're squaring it.
And so that's the size of
the group times the sum of mu
of g squared.
OK.
So that's the right-hand side.
And over here, we're
counting with multiplicity.
And the multiplicity
is always large.
So this is at least
d plus 1 over 2
times sigma 1 of T mu squared.
So there's an important
difference between the sigma 1
and sigma 0.
The sigma 0 went with
the constant functions.
That lives in a
space of dimension 1.
But anybody else lives in
a big dimensional space.
And so that gets
counted many times.
And that changes
the playing field.
AUDIENCE: What is d here?
LAWRENCE GUTH: What is d?
Sorry, d is p.
Sorry.
Thank you.
Is it right up there?
Yeah.
So d is the dimension
of the representation.
That's why I put it.
But it was just a mistake.
It's supposed to
be p plus 1 over 2.
So what needs to be
spelled out more carefully?
I think we should just spell
out a little more carefully why
the eigenspaces
have this G action.
OK.
So first of all,
what is T mu star?
Let's say mu star of G
is just mu of G inverse.
And if you write down the
definition of the adjoint
and play around a
little bit, you'll
see that T mu star is
just T of mu new star.
So T mu T mu star of
f is just you take f.
You convolve it with mu star.
And then you
convolve it with mu.
So it's T of mu
convolved with mu star.
OK.
So our operator is still
just a convolution operator,
just convolving by something
slightly different.
And now we want to see
that convolution commutes
with some symmetries of g.
OK.
So our convolution has been
defined to be on the right.
And so I think it's supposed to
commute with the symmetries of f
on the left.
So let's say the left
action of g on f with h
is f of g inverse h.
I want to say that convolution
commutes with this action.
So I want to claim that
for any measure in nu,
If I take T nu of
left action g of f,
this is left action g T nu of f.
OK.
Cross my finger that I
wrote everything correctly
so this is true.
T nu of left action
g of f at some--
let's say I evaluate that at x.
So I'm going to convolve
this function with nu.
So it's Lgf convolved
with nu at x.
So it's the sum x1 x2 equals
x Lg f of x1 nu of x2.
So that's the sum x1 x2 equals
x f of g inverse x1 nu of x2.
All right.
So the product of these
two guys is g inverse x.
So really, the product
x1 tilde times x2 tilde
is g inverse x f of x1
tilde nu of x2 tilde.
So that is T nu of f
evaluated at g inverse x.
So that's Lg of T nu of f of x.
Phew.
You probably can see that
I'm not a very algebraically
minded person.
I think probably a more
highbrow proof of this
says something about
acting on the left commutes
with acting on the right.
Anyway, OK.
So the group acts on functions,
and that action commutes
with this.
So if you have an eigenspace of
this, the group will act on it.
All right.
So if T nu of f is lambda
f, then T nu of Lgf
will be Lg T nu of f,
which is Lg of lambda f,
which is lambda Lg of f.
So g acts on V lambda,
the eigenspace.
OK.
So that fleshes out this.
Cool.
So let's do a quick
application of this
to see what we have
learned about mixing.
So remember that we already know
that this thing is bounded by 1.
And it's not at all
clear whether this
is bigger or smaller than 1.
It depends upon mu.
If this is bigger than 1,
then this is kind of useless.
But if this is smaller
than 1, then it
gives us some new information.
OK.
AUDIENCE: One question
about proposition.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Does it require the
existence of the representation
of degree p plus 1 over 2?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Not exactly.
This operator here
has eigenspaces.
And we know that the
group acts on them.
So therefore, there are
representations of this group.
OK, so application.
So suppose A is a
subset of SL2 Fp.
It doesn't have to be A
Selberg, just any subset.
And remember that mu of A is
the uniform measure on A. OK.
So what is mu of A L2 squared?
Well, we square the amplitude
of 1 over a squared.
And then we add it up.
And we'll get a
contribution from A points.
So we get 1 over the
cardinality of A.
Right.
So if we just plug
in our estimate,
proposition 2 tells us
that sigma 1 of TA squared
is bounded by p squared
1 over A. Whoops.
I did that wrong.
That's not good.
This is about p cubed.
This is about p.
So it's bounded by
p squared over A.
So we can see that if A
is significantly bigger
than p squared, then sigma
1 of TA is less than 1.
So if A is 10 p squared--
or, even better, p to
the 2 plus epsilon--
than sigma 1 is quite
a bit less than 1.
And so this random
walk will mix quickly.
In particular,
corollary of that is
that if H is a proper
subgroup of SL2 Fp--
so we saw earlier, if you take
a proper subgroup and you walk,
you just stay in the
subgroup, it won't mix at all.
Sigma 1 would be 1.
Then H has size which is
smaller than around p squared.
And we saw earlier that
there is a subgroup
of size about p squared.
So this is sharp.
OK.
So this addresses the question
that was raised earlier.
The set A may be large.
If you just know the
size of A, can you
say whether it mixes or not?
This is essentially a sharp
answer to that question.
If A is significantly
bigger than p squared,
then the random walk does mix.
And if A is smaller
than p squared,
A could live in a subgroup, and
the random walk may not mix.
This whole phenomenon is quite
different from what would
happen in a commutative group.
In a commutative group, you
could take very large subsets,
and still, nothing
might mix, partly
because the commutative group
might have very large subgroups.
But even if it doesn't,
it wouldn't work.
Yeah.
Cool.
OK.
So that's all very interesting,
but it doesn't look
very close to this theorem yet.
Because this
theorem says that we
get mixing if our subset has
size larger than p squared.
And this is a subset of size 4.
So we will have to think some
more about how to do this.
And we will talk
about that next time.